the international court of justice in
the ha has ordered Israel to stop its
military offensive in the city of Rafa
in southern Gaza the United Nations Top
Court described the humanitarian
situation there as disastrous and
ordered Israel to allow unhindered
access of Aid Israel has repeatedly said
it has the right to defend itself from
Hamas militants and is unlikely to
comply with the ruling God also ordered
Israel to report its progress in
applying the measures within a month mon
the ruling was in response to a request
from South Africa though the court has
no way to enforce its decision the
ruling does add further International
pressure on the Israeli government here
is the president of the Court Naf Salam
the court considers that in Conformity
with obligations under the genocide
convention Israel must immediately hold
its military offens and any other action
in the Rafa Governor which may inflict
on the Palestinian group in Gaza
conditions of life that could bring
about its physical destruction in H or
in
par let's look at what this might mean
with Mark Weller he's professor of
international law and international
constitutional studies at the University
of Cambridge in the UK welcome to
DW Israeli citizens suffered terrible
atrocities on October the 7th last year
is the government of Israel argued in
court that it's taking exceptional
measures to min minimize harm to the
civilian population in Gaza today's
ruling does seem to indicate that the
court sees things rather
differently well Israel is of course
entitled to the right to self-defense in
response to the horrible atrocious uh
events of the seventh of October but the
right to self-defense is not unlimited
and it can never transgress humanitarian
law the law that surprise that supports
the Dignity of human persons human
beings in any circumstance even in war
and the court has now spoken for the
third time in just a few months which is
unprecedented ordering Israel the first
time uh not to do anything which could
constitute acts of genocide against the
people of Gaza the Palestinians the
second time it has ordered Israel to
ensure that there is full humanitarian
access and now almost unprecedentedly it
has ordered a state claiming to be in
the middle of a self-defense operation
to Halt a major element of that campaign
it's rougher
offensive okay so let's pick up the two
you you mentioned there uh two previous
rulings there nothing that constitutes
genocide and full humanitarian access
today's ruling uh required Israel uh to
uh provide verification or to allow
verification uh of humanitarian access
which seems to indicate that the court
does not believe that Israel has
complied with its earlier
ruling well it certainly hasn't complied
uh in the sense that the court has found
that the situation has gotten much worse
and therefore very unusually it has made
yet a further ruling in this case and
the court is very very concerned about
the future of those individuals who were
sent to Rafa as a safe place by Israel
to escape the consequences of the fight
and who are now being displaced from
there without adequate measures have
been taken to ensure their survival in
other places and the court has noticed
that no such adequate steps have been
taken okay so there we have a problem
don't we because the court rules uh do
something about humanitarian access the
court rules today uh against uh Israel
and says stop what's going on in Rafa
and let us check that you've complied
with our earlier ruling we heard
yesterday
from an Israeli government spokesman who
was quoted as saying no power on Earth
will stop Israel from protecting its
citizens and going after Hamas in Gaza
the court can rule until it's blue in
the face where's it or
else well uh how many Legion does the
pope have as was famously asked the
court doesn't have an army to enforce
its wishes it could have an army if the
UN Security Council were able to
exercise its role because the UN
Security Council has in principle the
power to enforce judgments of the court
but of course with the US veto that is
not possible and therefore it is the
very very significant diplomatic
pressure you saw the indictments by the
international criminal court in relation
to Mr Netanyahu a completely SE we
should
say and those uh have been backed up now
yet again uh in addition to their
individual responsibility by these
actions directed towards the state of
Israel and it really makes the
Diplomatic space for Israel much much
more difficult to maneuver in Israel has
been arguing we have been a model of
humanitarian law compliance but with all
of this evidence those arguments ring
increasingly Hollow as most people who
watch television of course already know
okay once you have these authoritative
findings from the highest judicial
bodies in the world it is much more
difficult for Israel to maintain its
position that it is in a modest way
defending itself does this ruling impose
any duties or obligations on any other
signatories uh to the court to do or not
do anything I'm thinking of the United
States amongst others who it could be
argued are is or are supplying Israel
with the wherewithal to carry out the
activities that the court has now
prohibited fny you should say that as of
course you hinting at Germany is at
present subject to a case in the
international court of justice where
nicaragu has argued that the continued
provision of Arms by Germany to Israel
violates the genocide
convention and for a state like Germany
which Prides itself as a model of
compliance with international law um on
the one hand but which also wants to
remain a very strong friend of Israel
that is a real huge dilemma coming up
for it the United States uh will will
not likely uh consider uh the court in
relation to its arms exports which are
of course quite massive uh the United
Kingdom may be in a different position
because under its ministerial code it
cannot uh
license uh the export of weapons uh if
these weapons are likely to be used
against against international law or
certainly in favor of a campaign of
genocide so these various pronouncements
again make the space to maneuver for
Israel and for its allies uh
significantly smaller doesn't end the
conflict but it is another piece in the
Mosaic uh which will help I think
persuade Israel ultimately to try not to
isolate itself entirely from the
International Community and just a final
word on genocide because today's ruling
is a part of a broader lawsuit brought
by South Africa last year accusing
Israel of committing genocide in Gaza
just explain to us briefly what impact
today's decision has on
that well this is part of that case it
is the third interim action by the court
to protect the people of Palestine
during the many years it will take the
court to give the actual ruling as to
whether or not genocide has taken place
so this action does not actually
Prejudice the finding of the court at
the end of that lengthy period of legal
argument as to whether or not genocide
occurred remember the Bosnian case where
most thought uh we were faced with a
significant campaign of genocide and
after many years of deliberation the
court found that sanit was genocide but
the rest of this Dreadful campaign of
crimes against humanity didn't quite
measure up to that high legal standard
that's very clear Professor thank you so
much for walking us through that
Professor Mark Weller from the
University of
Cambridge we have Team coverage of
today's ruling from Israel and South
Africa I'm joined by our correspondents
a Ibrahim she's in Jerusalem and Diane
Hawker who's in Johannesburg to both of
you welcome a let me start with you have
we seen or heard any reaction from the
Israeli
government we've heard sort of
individual reactions from members of
government and the opposition so let me
just walk you through what we've heard
so far we've heard from Benny Gans uh
he's a minister in the uh War cabinet
and after the ruling was issued he said
that Israel would continue its quote
just and necessary war against Hamas to
return its uh hostages and he said that
his country is committed to fighting for
the hostages for their return and the
security of its citizens anywhere and
and that includes ra so that gives you a
hint uh into uh the kind of discussions
that may be happening in the war cabinet
right now there's still that commitment
and focus on Rafa we've also heard from
B smotrich that's the far-right Finance
Minister in Israel who said that uh
Israel I'm paraphrasing now Israel um
stopping the fight in Rafa or the fight
for Rafa is the equivalent of Israel
sort of forfeiting its right to exist um
and so there's a definite uh uh sign
from the far right that they um you know
would reject this ruling but that's
unsurprising we've also heard from y
Leed that he's the leader of the
opposition and normally a fierce critic
of uh prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu
he also rejected the um the ruling and
said that the icj did not make a
connection or perhaps strong enough of a
connection between the release of the
hostages and the stopping of the
fighting that is not wholly ACC accurate
because judge Salam today as he
announced that ruling did of course talk
about how disturbing it is that Hamas
still holds hostages and called for
their release we haven't heard from uh
senior members like the prime minister
or the president yet but we can't expect
to hear from them soon and it will be
something along these lines that we've
just heard and you can also expect even
harsher criticism as the Prime Minister
it's sort of become a habit whenever
Israel faces this Challenge from
International institution accusations of
anti- ISM and anti-israel uh uh
propaganda sort of uh are the first
thing that the Prime Minister comes back
with we haven't heard that yet but
that's very very probable all right
Diane let me take this to you we spoke
with a legal scholar earlier today who
said that this ruling was definitely a
clearcut win for South Africa what have
the reactions been
there well the South African government
is definitely taking it as a win uh we
heard from the uh Department of intern
relations earlier on they put out a
video statement from the director
General there um saying that this was a
groundbreaking ruling and he's
essentially saying that South Africa
intends to continue uh with this uh uh
process that they have currently started
they will also go to the United uh
Nations security Council now that this
ruling has been made and look to the
security Council to take some steps that
in a way bolster that ruling zann Dango
also um you know saying that although
the the icj didn't use the word
ceasefire that the effect of what they
have called for is a de facto ceasefire
which is something that South Africa has
been calling for uh for several months
now so definitely seen from the South
African government perspective as a win
for their cause and also an opportunity
to continue to collect additional
information for their case going forward
DW's Diane Hawker in Johannesburg and
DW's a Ibrahim in Jerusalem to both of
you thank
you I'm joined Now by Michael Becker
he's assistant professor of
international human rights law at
Trinity College in Dublin he is also a
former legal adviser at the
international court of justice it's good
to have you with us Mr Becker let me
just ask you is this an outright victory
for South Africa that brought this case
to the court
well it's certainly the case that South
Africa received just about everything
that it requested from the court this
time around we know that South Africa
has gone to the icj multiple times
seeking provisional measures this kind
of urgent interm relief and has asked
each time for the court to order Israel
to suspend the military operations up
until this point the court declined to
take that step to go that far and so the
fact that the court has now intervened
in this way or ordering Israel to
suspend military operations in at least
in the Rafa uh part of Gaza uh is a is a
pretty uh extraordinary development for
South Africa and it's also pretty
extraordinary I would add that that the
court has ordered Israel to allow
unimpeded access to un fact-f finding
bodies or commissions of inquiry this is
also something that parties in multiple
cases have requested before and the
court has always been very reluctant to
order so that also suggests an extremely
high degree of concern on the part of
the Court how much then of a defeat is
this for
Israel well it certainly adds to the
list of of defeats that I think Israel
has experienced in this case along the
way uh Israel all along has uh urged the
court not to take this step making the
argument that this would uh leave Israel
unable to defend itself when it's
involved in an ongoing conflict
uh but this really means that the court
has found that there is simply no other
way at this point to preserve the rights
at issue in this case the rights of the
Palestinian population in Gaza not to be
subject to acts that might meet the
legal definition of genocide uh I do
think that the court the order just came
out haven't had a chance to completely
comb through it in detail but as far as
I can tell the court didn't say anything
about what this leaves Israel with the
ability to do uh but I think it can't
really be construed to mean that Israel
is no longer allowed to defend itself if
Israel suffers future attacks so if
Hamas for example were to abuse what the
court has ordered here by using Rafa as
a staging area to launch rocket attacks
uh at Israel this court the court
Court's order isn't going to stop Israel
and I don't think it's intended to stop
Israel in that particular circumstance
so really one would hope that this also
incentivizes Hamas to enter into what is
a de facto ceasefire well it's
interesting that you say that um you
know as well as I do that Israel has
already declared that it will not comply
with any orders to stop its military
operation so at the end of the day what
difference will this judgment
make well that's true and I haven't seen
the immediate Israeli response yet to
this decision but uh we can probably
expect a message of of defiance um in
terms of what the court has said today
and you're right I don't I don't know
that this is going to have any kind of
immediate impact on how Israel is
carrying out the offensive in Rafa it
might be wishful thinking but perhaps
behind the scenes this does create a
kind of offramp for elements or
constituencies within the Israeli
government who are urging uh for a
change of course but I don't think we'll
see anything along those lines in terms
of the public narrative coming from
Israel yeah we we're still still waiting
for official reactions from Israel let's
talk about South Africa for a moment
South Africa's request for a ceasefire
it was just one part of a broader
lawsuit filed late last year accusing
Israel of committing genocide in Gaza
what does today's ruling what does it
mean for for this overarching
case right so this kind of set of
provisional measures request so this is
the fourth time that's out that Africa
has returned to the court since filing
that case at the end of December last
year all of the decisions and
determinations that the court makes
along the way in responding to these
requests for interm Relief these are
without prejudice to the case on the
merits and so it will still you know
it's going to be years away after the
court the case has been fully briefed
and fully argued that the court will
have to decide that underlying question
has uh Israel uh violated the genocide
convention has it breached its oblig
ations under that treaty those questions
remain unresolved and it wasn't for the
court today to make any kind of
determinations about whether what has
happened in the past constitutes
genocide or necessarily even what's
happening right now whether that
constitutes genocide this is all about a
risk this is about a forward-looking
risk and so South Africa has been able
to persuade the court that there is a
serious urgent risk that unless the
court intervenes uh something that might
constitute genocide could actually take
place and that's what the court has um
relied upon in seeing that it's legally
uh Justified to issue these measures Mr
Becker what does this ruling mean for
countries that
support Israel and of course I'm
thinking of the United States here um
for example with with weapons and other
military aid um are they on slippery a
slippery slope right
now I think that was already the case
since the Court's order in in in March
um and this really does put the uh the
Biden Administration in in a difficult
position the Biden administration had
already suggested that uh if Israel were
to proceed with the military offensive
in Rafa that this would be kind of a red
line for the US uh and we did see that
at least certain some limited shipments
of weapons were withheld uh but the US
seems to be uh taking kind of a very
equivocal position on whether what's
happening and Rafa constitutes that
major military operation that they
objected to I think the Court's order
today then puts further pressure on the
Biden Administration to say enough is
enough uh now is the time for uh Israel
to step back and find a different way to
manage this
conflict Michael Becker assistant
professor of international human rights
law we appreciate you taking the time to
talk with us and helping us analyze this
story this breaking story here the the
the court ordering Israel to stop its
military campaign in Rafa thank you
thank you